%title Tcpdump

tcpdump is a common packet analyzer that runs under the command line

= Syntax =
Syntax: 
| Protocol | Direction | Host(s) | Value | Logical Operations | Other expression |

Example:
| tcp | dst | 10.1.1.1 | 80 | and | tcp dst 10.2.2.2 3128 |

== Protocol: ==
Values: ether, fddi, ip, arp, rarp, decnet, lat, sca, moprc, mopdl, tcp and udp.

If no protocol is specified, all the protocols are used. 

== Direction: ==
Values: src, dst, src and dst, src or dst

If no source or destination is specified, the "src or dst" keywords are applied. 

For example, "host 10.2.2.2" is equivalent to "src or dst host 10.2.2.2".

== Host(s): ==
Values: net, port, host, portrange.

If no host(s) is specified, the "host" keyword is used.

For example, "src 10.1.1.1" is equivalent to "src host 10.1.1.1". 

== Logical Operations: ==
Values: not, and, or.

Negation ("not") has highest precedence. Alternation ("or") and concatenation ("and") have equal precedence and associate left to right.

For example,

"not tcp port 3128 and tcp port 23" is equivalent to "(not tcp port 3128) and tcp port 23".

"not tcp port 3128 and tcp port 23" is NOT equivalent to "not (tcp port 3128 and tcp port 23)".

= Arguments =

== -A ==
print in ASCII

== -c ==
Specify the receive count 

== -D ==
Print the list of the network interfaces available on the system and on which tcpdump can capture packets

== -i ==
Listen on interface

== -l ==
>> tcpdump -l | tee dat

== -n ==
Don't convert addresses to names

== -v/-vv ==


= Read More =

* [http://www.ha97.com/4550.html Linux抓包工具tcpdump详解]
* [http://www.cnblogs.com/ggjucheng/archive/2012/01/14/2322659.html Linux tcpdump命令详解]
* [http://openmaniak.com/tcpdump.php TCPDUMP - The Easy Tutorial(*)]
* [http://danielmiessler.com/study/tcpdump/ A tcpdump Tutorial and Primer]
* [http://www.tecmint.com/12-tcpdump-commands-a-network-sniffer-tool/ 12 Tcpdump Commands – A Network Sniffer Tool]
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tcpdump wiki-tcpdump]


= History =
Create 2013/01/13

Last modified 2013/01/13
